Mcr/saml testing (#3477)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/test-saml-configuration.mdx

---
publish_date: 2025-01-27

> title: "Test Your FusionAuth SAML Configuration"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "How to Test FusionAuth SAML Configuration: Step-by-Step Tutorial 2025"
```

> description: 'How to test your FusionAuth SAML configuration.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Learn how to test and validate your FusionAuth SAML configuration using IAMShowcase. Complete guide with step-by-step instructions for setting up SAML authentication, debugging tips, and practical examples.'
```

categories: Tutorial
tags: saml, configuration,iamshowcase, idp
excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---

import Aside from '/src/components/Aside.astro';
import Breadcrumb from 'src/components/Breadcrumb.astro';
import InlineUIElement from 'src/components/InlineUIElement.astro';
import InlineField from 'src/components/InlineField.astro';
import SAMLLogin from "src/diagrams/blog/test-saml-configuration/saml-login.astro";

Setting up SAML authentication for your application can feel a bit like poking around in the dark sometimes. So many nerd knobs to tweak. You have read the documentation, triple checked your settings, but you're still not sure if you have everything dialed in.

Good news! There is a way to test and make sure your SAML v2 configuration is set up correctly. Enter [IAMShowcase](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/). [IAMShowcase](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/) is a site that acts as a SAML v2 SP (service provider) to test your FusionAuth IdP (Identity Provider). The authentication world is full of acronyms and that last sentence is no exception. 

So, grab a cup of coffee (or something stronger if you're so inclined) and let's break it down.

{/* more */}

> ## Acronyms And Jargon And Bears, Oh My!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Understanding Common Acronyms in Identity
```

If you are familiar with acronyms like SAML, SP, and IdP feel free to skip to the next section. For those of us that are merely mortal, here are some definitions.

> **[SAML v2](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/saml)** stands for "Security Assertion Markup Language", the second version. SAML is like a digital passport. It lets users log into one service and also gain access to another service without needing to login again. It is a standard way to verify a user's identity and authorize access to applications and services. The user can log in once and access multiple applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**[SAML v2](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/saml)** stands for "Security Assertion Markup Language", the second version. SAML is like a digital passport. It lets users log into one service and also gain access to another service without needing to log in again. It is a standards based way to verify a user's identity and authorize access to applications and services. The user can log in once and access multiple applications.
```

**IdP** is short for "Identity Provider". An IdP is a service that verifies your user's identity and communicate that identity in a secure way to any applications that depend on it. This is where the user logs in. FusionAuth is the IdP for this tutorial. 

**SP** is an acronym for "Service Provider". Think of this as any application or service your user wants to access. The SP delegates identity ownership to the IdP. In this tutorial, IAMShowcase is the SP.

<Aside type="note">

> [FusionAuth supports SAML](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/identity-providers/overview-samlv2) both as a SAML Identity Provider (IdP) and as a Service Provider (SP). Using FusionAuth for both could make this more difficult to follow, so for the purposes of this blog we will only be using FusionAuth as the IdP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[FusionAuth supports SAML](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/identity-providers/overview-samlv2) both as a SAML Identity Provider (IdP) and as a Service Provider (SP). Using FusionAuth for both makes this blog post more murky. For this post, FusionAuth is always the IdP.
```

</Aside>

## Test FusionAuth SAML Configuration With IAMShowcase

> There are generic [instructions](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start) on the IAMShowcase site, but the rest of this tutorial describes how to set up FusionAuth as a SAML IdP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are generic [instructions](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start) on the IAMShowcase site, but the rest of this tutorial describes how to set up and test FusionAuth as a SAML IdP.
```

> You will need an instance of [FusionAuth up and running](/docs/quickstarts/5-minute-docker).

Reviewer 2: Is this the right place to point someone who wants to get FusionAuth up and running? I can think of others, but wanted to check with you.

Author: I did want to point to the 5 minute guide, not the Docker specific.  Thanks.

> ### Create A New Application Named IAMShowcase Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Create A New Application Named IAMShowcase Example
```

Log into FusionAuth and select <Breadcrumb>Applications</Breadcrumb>. Give the application a <InlineField>name</InlineField> such as `IAMShowcase Example`. If you have more than one tenant, select the default <InlineField>Tenant</InlineField>. Then click the blue disk to save the configuration.

### Retrieve The Configuration Values From The IAMShowcase Website

> The IAMShowcase site provides a metadata file that some IdPs can import. You can get the XML from the IAMShowcase site by clicking on [Get Metadata](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start). FusionAuth does not support importing of the metadata file. To see the values used, view the XML and manually enter the information in the SAML tab of the application in FusionAuth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The IAMShowcase site provides a metadata file that some IdPs can import. You can get the XML from the IAMShowcase site by clicking on [Get Metadata](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start). FusionAuth does not support importing of the metadata file. To see the values used, view the XML and manually enter the information in the <Breadcrumb>SAML</Breadcrumb> tab of the application configuration in FusionAuth.
```

> Example of metadata provided by IAMShowcase:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example of metadata provided by IAMShowcase:
```

```
<md:EntityDescriptor xmlns:md="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:metadata" xmlns:ds="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#" entityID="IAMShowcase" validUntil="2025-12-09T09:13:31.006Z">
<md:SPSSODescriptor AuthnRequestsSigned="false" WantAssertionsSigned="true" protocolSupportEnumeration="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:protocol">
<md:NameIDFormat>urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:1.1:nameid-format:unspecified</md:NameIDFormat>
<md:NameIDFormat>urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:1.1:nameid-format:emailAddress</md:NameIDFormat>
<md:AssertionConsumerService Binding="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:bindings:HTTP-POST" Location="https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/acs" index="0" isDefault="true"/>
</md:SPSSODescriptor>
</md:EntityDescriptor>
```

> ### Configure The IAMShowcase Example Application For SAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Configure The IAMShowcase Example Application For SAML
```

Select <Breadcrumb>Applications</Breadcrumb> and <InlineUIElement>Edit</InlineUIElement> the IAMShowcase Example application in FusionAuth. Select the <Breadcrumb>SAML</Breadcrumb> tab of the application and configure it with the following values.

<InlineField>Enabled</InlineField> `True`

<InlineField>Issuer</InlineField> `IAMShowcase`

> This is the entityID from the EntityDescriptor node in the matadata provided by IAMShowcase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the `entityID` from the `EntityDescriptor` node in the metadata provided by IAMShowcase. Here's the relevant excerpt from the example XML above.
```

```
<md:EntityDescriptor xmlns:md="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:metadata" xmlns:ds="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#" entityID="IAMShowcase" validUntil="2025-12-09T09:13:31.006Z">
```

<InlineField>Authorized Redirect URLs</InlineField> `https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/acs`

> This is the Location from the AssertionConsumerService node in the matadata provided by IAMShowcase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the `Location` from the `AssertionConsumerService` node in the metadata provided by IAMShowcase. Here's the relevant excerpt from the example XML above.
```

Reviewer 2: also makes sense to spellcheck everything (would have caught `matadata`. I like to copy the blog text from the local astro instance and paste into google docs, which also catches tense errors.

```
<md:AssertionConsumerService Binding="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:bindings:HTTP-POST" Location="https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/acs" index="0" isDefault="true"/>
```
<InlineField>Signing key</InlineField> `Auto generate a new key on save...`

Leave all other defaults the same, and click the blue disk icon button to save it.

![IAMShowcase Example Application SAML configuration.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/fusionauth-app-saml-settings.png)

> ### Add The User To The IAMShowcase Example Application 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Add The User To The IAMShowcase Example Application 
```

> Select <InlineUIElement>Users</InlineUIElement>. Choose a user you wnat to test the SAML configuration with. Select <InlineUIElement>Manage</InlineUIElement>. <InlineUIElement>Add registration</InlineUIElement> for the IAMShowcase Example application for the user.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest reading the blog post aloud, as some of the sentences are a bit awkward. I know it is a pain, but you'll catch things.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select <InlineUIElement>Users</InlineUIElement>. Choose a user you want to test the SAML log in process with. Select <InlineUIElement>Manage</InlineUIElement> and then click the <InlineUIElement>Add registration</InlineUIElement> button for the IAMShowcase Example application. Click the save icon and you have registered the user for the application.
```

![Showing user added to IAMShowcase Example application in FusionAuth.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/fusionauth-add-user-to-application.png)

> ### Upload The IdP Metadata (For FusionAuth) To The IAMShowcase Site

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5. Upload The IdP Metadata (For FusionAuth) To The IAMShowcase Site
```

Now that you've told FusionAuth (the IdP) about IAMShowcase (the SP), you need to do the reverse. You have to tell IAMShowcase about FusionAuth. 

> Click on <Breadcrumb>Applications</Breadcrumb>. Select <InlineUIElement>View</InlineUIElement> for `IAMShowcase Example`. Scroll down to the <Breadcrumb>SAML v2 integration details</Breadcrumb> section. Copy the Metadata URL and paste that into a new browser window to get the XML metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click on <Breadcrumb>Applications</Breadcrumb>. Select <InlineUIElement>View</InlineUIElement> for `IAMShowcase Example`. Scroll down to the <Breadcrumb>SAML v2 integration details</Breadcrumb> section. Copy the <InlineUIElement>Metadata URL</InlineUIElement> and paste that into a new browser window to get the XML metadata.
```

![FusionAuth SAML integration details.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/fusionauth-saml-details.png)

> ### Update The IAMShowcase Site With The Metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 6. Update The IAMShowcase Site With The Metadata
```

Paste the XML into the [Upload metadata](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start) box on the IAMShowcase site. Click <InlineUIElement>Submit XML</InlineUIElement>. Copy the URL that pops up to your clipboard.

> ### See The SAML Workflow In Action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 7. See The SAML Workflow In Action
```

Paste the new URL into a new window in your browser. This will show information for the user that is logged into FusionAuth on the IAMShowcase website.
![Showing user information from FusionAuth application in IAMShowcase.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/iamshowcase-user-info-from-fusionauth.png)

The flow for this will look like the diagram below.

> <SAMLLogin alt={"SAML login flow."} />

Reviewer 2: Great diagram!

---
publish_date: 2025-01-27
title: "Test Your FusionAuth SAML Configuration"
description: 'How to test your FusionAuth SAML configuration.'
authors: Mark Robustelli
image: /img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/test-saml-configuration-header.png
categories: Tutorial

> tags: saml, configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tags: saml, configuration,iamshowcase, idp
```

excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---

import Aside from '/src/components/Aside.astro';
import InlineUIElement from 'src/components/InlineUIElement.astro';
import InlineField from 'src/components/InlineField.astro';

Setting up authentication for your application can feel a bit like poking around in the dark sometimes. So many nerd knobs to tweak. You have read the documentation, triple checked your settings, but you're still not sure if you have everything dialed in. Good news, there is a way to test and make sure your SAML v2 configuration is set up correctly. Enter [IAMShowcase](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/). [IAMShowcase](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/) is a site that acts as a SAML v2 SP (service provider) to test your FusionAuth IdP (Identity Provider). The authentication world is full of acronyms and that last sentence is no exception. So, grab a cup of coffee (or something stronger if you're so inclined) and let's break it down.

{/* more */}
## Acronyms and Jargon and Bears, Oh My!
If you are familiar with acronyms like SAML, SP, and IdP feel free to skip to the next section. For those of us that are merely mortal, here are some definitions.

> **[SAML v2](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/saml)** - Security Assertion Markup Language - SAML is like a digital passport. It lets users log into one service and also gain access to another service without needing to login again. It is a standard way to verify a user's identity and authorize access to applications and services. The user can log in once and access multiple applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**[SAML v2](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/saml)** stands for "Security Assertion Markup Language", the second version. SAML is like a digital passport. It lets users log into one service and also gain access to another service without needing to login again. It is a standard way to verify a user's identity and authorize access to applications and services. The user can log in once and access multiple applications.
```

> **SP** - Service Provider - Think of this as an application or service your user wants to access. In this case IAMShowcase will be the SP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**SP** is an acronym for "Service Provider". Think of this as any application or service your user wants to access. The SP delegates identity ownership to the IdP. In this tutorial, IAMShowcase is the SP.
```

> **IdP** - Identity Provider - A service that verifies your user's identity. In this case, FusionAuth. This will be where the user logs in. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**IdP** is short for "Identity Provider". An IdP is a service that verifies your user's identity and communicate that identity in a secure way to any applications that depend on it. This is where the user logs in. FusionAuth is the IdP for this tutorial. 
```

Reviewer 2: I would move this to ahead of the SP definition so you can use the IdP term in the SP definition.

<Aside type="note">

> [FusionAuth supports SAML](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/identity-providers/overview-samlv2) both as a SAML Identity Provider (IdP) and as a Service Provider (SP). Using FusionAuth for both could make this more difficult to follow, so for the purposes of this blog we will only be using FusionAuth as the IdP.

Reviewer 2: Do you want to address the fact that when you configure a SAMLv2 Identity Provider in FusionAuth, you are actually having FusionAuth be the SP? Or do you think that is confusing?

</Aside>

## Test FusionAuth SAML Configuration with IAMShowcase

> There are generic [instructions](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start) on the IAMShowcase site, but below will describe how to set up FusionAuth as a SAML IDP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are generic [instructions](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start) on the IAMShowcase site, but the rest of this tutorial describes how to set up FusionAuth as a SAML IdP.
```

Reviewer 2: should use present tense, not future tense.

> You will need an instance of [FusionAuth up and running](/docs/quickstarts/5-minute-docker) that is available to the outside world. Localhost won't cut it for this one, you will at least need to [expose a local port to the Internet](/docs/get-started/download-and-install/development/exposing-instance). 

Reviewer 2: Why does localhost not cut it?? I think it is because iamshowcase and FusionAuth need to communicate but I'm not sure.

Author: At on point when I was testing, I thought local host might be the problem. Turns out it is not and corrected. Thanks!

> ### Create a New Application named IAMShowcase Example.

Reviewer 2: no period at the end of the header.

Reviewer 2: this happens a bit down below, please check all of them.

You could even write a new content check script to check for this if you want. https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-site/tree/main/src/scripts

Author: done

> Log into FusionAuth and select <InlineUIElement>Applications</InlineUIElement>. Give the application a <InlineField>name</InlineField> such as IAMShowcase Example select the default <InlineField>tenant</InlineField>. Then click save.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Log into FusionAuth and select <Breadcrumb>Applications</Breadcrumb>. Give the application a <InlineField>name</InlineField> such as `IAMShowcase Example`. If you have more than one tenant, select the default <InlineField>Tenant</InlineField>. Then click the blue disk to save the configuration.
```

### Retrieve the configuration values from the IAMShowcase website. 

> The IAMShowcase site provides a metadata file that some IdPs can import. You can get the xml from the IAMShowcase site by clicking on [Get Metadata](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start). FusionAuth does not support importing of the metadata file. To see the values used, view the xml and manually enter the information in the SAML tab of the application in FusionAuth.

Reviewer 2: Did vale not catch "xml"? Seems like it should be capitalized: `XML`.

Author: vale did not catch. XML capital now.

Example of metadata provided by IAMShowcase:
```
<md:EntityDescriptor xmlns:md="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:metadata" xmlns:ds="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#" entityID="IAMShowcase" validUntil="2025-12-09T09:13:31.006Z">
<md:SPSSODescriptor AuthnRequestsSigned="false" WantAssertionsSigned="true" protocolSupportEnumeration="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:protocol">
<md:NameIDFormat>urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:1.1:nameid-format:unspecified</md:NameIDFormat>
<md:NameIDFormat>urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:1.1:nameid-format:emailAddress</md:NameIDFormat>
<md:AssertionConsumerService Binding="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:bindings:HTTP-POST" Location="https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/acs" index="0" isDefault="true"/>
</md:SPSSODescriptor>
</md:EntityDescriptor>
```

> ### Configure IAMShowcase Example Application for SAML. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Configure The IAMShowcase Example Application for SAML
```

> Select <InlineUIElement>Applications</InlineUIElement> and <InlineUIElement>Edit</InlineUIElement> the IAMShowcase Example application in FusionAuth. Select the <InlineUIElement>SAML</InlineUIElement> tab of the application and configure it with the following values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select <Breadcrumb>Applications</Breadcrumb> and <InlineUIElement>Edit</InlineUIElement> the IAMShowcase Example application in FusionAuth. Select the <Breadcrumb>SAML</Breadcrumb> tab of the application and configure it with the following values.
```

> <InlineField>Enabled:</InlineField> `True`

Reviewer 2: No `:` on these field names. Please have them match the admin UI.

Author: done

> <InlineField>Issuer:</InlineField> `IAMShowcase`

Reviewer 2: Would be amazing if you showed which XML field from IAMShowcase matched with each field in FusionAuth. In this case it would be the `entityID` attribute of the `<md:EntityDescriptor>` tag. 

That helps the reader know how to map these two different files.

Author: updated

<InlineField>Authorized Redirect URLs:</InlineField> `https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/acs`

> <InlineField>Signing key:</InlineField> `Key generated for IAMShowcase example application` (This can be any key you created in Key Master) 

Reviewer 2: Whoops! Did they need to create that key above? or is there a default?

If no default, we should tell them to create a key (probably an RSA key) in a step above.

Author: updated

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Leave all other defaults the same, and click the blue disk icon button to save it.

```

> ![IAMShowcase Example SAML configuration.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/fusionauth-app-saml-settings.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![IAMShowcase Example Application SAML configuration.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/fusionauth-app-saml-settings.png)
```

### Add the user to the IAMShowcase Example application. 

> Select <InlineUIElement>Users</InlineUIElement>. Find the user you wish to test with. Select <InlineUIElement>Manage</InlineUIElement>. <InlineUIElement>Add registration</InlineUIElement> for the IAMShowcase Example application for the user. This user should have access to FusionAuth admin as well.

Reviewer 2: What does 'test with' mean here? It means you are going to start at IAMsimple, get sent to FusionAuth, log in, and be sent back to IAMsimple, which then can show the email address of the user you logged in as?

Or is it something else?

The diagram I mention might be helpful here.

Author: updated

> Select <InlineUIElement>Users</InlineUIElement>. Find the user you wish to test with. Select <InlineUIElement>Manage</InlineUIElement>. <InlineUIElement>Add registration</InlineUIElement> for the IAMShowcase Example application for the user. This user should have access to FusionAuth admin as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select <Breadcrumb>Users</Breadcrumb>. Find the user you wish to test with. Select <InlineUIElement>Manage</InlineUIElement>. <InlineUIElement>Add registration</InlineUIElement> for the IAMShowcase Example application for the user. This user should have access to FusionAuth admin as well.
```

Reviewer 2: why does the user need access tot he admin UI?

Author: This was only a convenience thing while testing and the user does not need access for testing so removed.

![Showing user added to IAMShowcase Example application in FusionAuth.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/fusionauth-add-user-to-application.png)

### Upload the IdP metadata (for FusionAuth) to the IAMShowcase site. 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Now that you've told FusionAuth (the IdP) about IAMSimple (the SP), you need to do the reverse. You have to tell IAMSimple about FusionAuth. 

```

> Click on <InlineUIElement>Applications</InlineUIElement>. Select <InlineUIElement>View</InlineUIElement> for IAMShowcase Example. Scroll down to the <InlineField>SAML v2 integration details</InlineField> section. Copy the Metadata URL and paste that into a new browser window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click on <Breadcrumb>Applications</Breadcrumb>. Select <InlineUIElement>View</InlineUIElement> for `IAMShowcase Example`. Scroll down to the <v>SAML v2 integration details</Breadcrumb> section. Copy the Metadata URL and paste that into a new browser window to get the XML metadata.
```

![FusionAuth SAML integration details.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/fusionauth-saml-details.png)

### Update the IAMShowcase site with the Metadata.

> Paste the xml into the [Upload metadata](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start) box on the IAMShowcase site. Click Submit XML. Copy the url that pops up to your clipboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Paste the XML into the [Upload metadata](https://sptest.iamshowcase.com/instructions#start) box on the IAMShowcase site. Click <InlineUIElement>Submit XML</InlineUIElement>. Copy the URL that pops up to your clipboard.
```

> ### See it in Action.

Reviewer 2: What is the It here? A full SAML workflow? Something else?

Author: updated

Paste the new URL into a new window in your browser. This will show information for the user that is logged into FusionAuth on the IAMShowcase website.
![Showing user information from FusionAuth application in IAMShowcase.](/img/blogs/test-saml-configuration/iamshowcase-user-info-from-fusionauth.png)

## Conclusion

> SAML might seem intimidating at first. This may not be the be-all and end-all of SAML testing, but it is a good sanity check. This will allow simplified testing. If you are having trouble, try enabling logging and you will get more information to help you troubleshoot your configuration. FusionAuth handles the heavy lifting and IAMShowcase ensures it is configured correctly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SAML might seem intimidating at first. Following these steps is an easy way to make sure that FusionAuth is set up correctly to work with a generic SAML SP. This allows you to test this connection before integrating FusionAuth with other SAML SPs. 

If you are having trouble, set the <InlineField>Debug Enabled</InlineField> toggle to `true` on the <Breadcrumb>SAML</Breadcrumb> tab. This outputs more information to help you troubleshoot your configuration.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd also add where they can go to view the debug output `<Breadcrumb>Logs -> Event Log</Breadcrumb>`

Reviewer 2: Also, re: be-all end-all, don't knock your tutorial. It is a good one.
